JUDY WOODRUFF: The prospects for
a thaw in relations between the
U.S.
and Iran that some thought
possible after the nuclear deal
were again set back this week,
after several flash points that
showed the fundamental
disagreements that remain.
he landmark nuclear accord
signed in July between Iran and
six world powers led by the
United States is soon due to be
implemented fully.
Just this week, most of Iran's
stockpiles of low-enriched
uranium were removed from the
country by ship.
ut there are renewed tensions
between Iran and the U.S.
that could affect the nuclear
accord.
Recent ballistic missile tests
by Iran were said by the United
Nations to violate prohibitions
on missile testing.
The Obama administration then
drew up additional sanctions on
Iran's missile program.
ut, last night, The Wall
Street Journal reported the
White House had delayed those
sanctions for now.
Iran's president, Hassan
Rouhani, said yesterday his
nation wouldn't only continue
its missile development, but
expand it.
nd just last weekend, Iranian
boats within the very tight
quarters of the Straits of
Hormuz, the gateway to the
Persian Gulf, fired a rocket
near the U.S.
aircraft carrier Harry Truman, a
move the U.S.
called highly provocative.
The carrier and its battle
group, and a French naval
vessel, were sailing into the
Gulf to continue the bombardment
of the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria.
s we begin the new year, where
do things stand between the U.S.
and Iran?
or that we turn to Karim
Sadjadpour.
He's senior associate at the
Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace.
elcome back to the program.
ARIM SADJADPOUR, Carnegie
Endowment For International
Peace: Thank you, Judy.
UDY WOODRUFF: So, what is
going on with Iran?
What's behind these missile
tests, what appears to be
provocative firing very close to
a U.S.
ship?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: Judy, when we
describe Iran's political
factions, we commonly use the
term moderates and hard-liners.
erhaps a more appropriate term
would be to call them -- you
have the bridge-builders, people
like President Rouhani and
Foreign Minister Zarif, that
want to build bridges with the
West, with the United States,
and you have the saboteurs,
those who are very concerned
about the prospect of a more
integrated Iran.
ithin the Revolutionary
Guards, you have a lot of
saboteurs, people who don't have
much in terms of their popular
support, but they have a lot in
terms of coercive power.
And I think that the missile
tests, the imprisonment of dual
nationals are all meant as a
signal to the United States that
the nuclear deal is not about a
broader rapprochement, the
relations are going to remain
antagonistic, and to Iran's own
population to send the signal,
don't think the nuclear
compromise was a sign of
weakness.
We remain strong and in control.
UDY WOODRUFF: Were these
tests, Karim, legal, though,
under the terms of the nuclear
deal?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: The missile
tests weren't a violation of the
nuclear deal, but they were a
violation of U.N.
Security Council resolutions.
nd I think this is the dilemma
that the Obama administration is
in.
Now, on one hand, the nuclear
deal with Iran could be the
crowning foreign policy
achievement of the Obama
administration.
They don't want to pursue
sanctions if it is going to
undermine the nuclear deal.
UDY WOODRUFF: What role did
the discussion in Washington, in
the White House, the reporting
that the White House might be
prepared to propose sanctions in
response, what role does that
play in all of this?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: Well, I think
people in Tehran certainly
probably recognize the dilemma
the Obama administration has.
hey don't want to do anything
to sabotage the nuclear deal.
They don't want to do anything
which could potentially weaken
these bridge-builders I was
talking about in Tehran.
At the same time, they want to
react to Iran's provocations.
o, I think that, internally in
the White House, there is
probably debate between folks at
Treasury, at the Pentagon and
those who are at the White House
and State Department.
UDY WOODRUFF: And you see --
of course, you had a number of
Republicans -- as soon as Iran
did this missile testing and the
other tests, there were comments
from Republicans saying, see, in
essence, we told you so, we
can't trust Iran.
hat clearly puts pressure on
the White House.
And so how do the Iranians read
that?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: Well, I
think, Judy, there is not only
going to be pressure from
Republicans, but also many
Democrats who supported the
Obama administration.
nd I think that -- you know,
what I always tell people, that
this nuclear deal is going to
take -- it has to be judged over
the course of years, not months.
It's not going to bring about a
rapprochement between the United
States and Iran anytime soon.
nd we're going to have to --
it's a 10-year agreement.
And we're going to have to
assess it in the months to -- in
years to come, but it's going to
be a very perilous deal.
And there's many saboteurs in
Washington and Tehran.
UDY WOODRUFF: Is it possible
it could become derailed if this
kind of activity continues?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: Absolutely.
think that there are so many
moving parts to this deal.
And then you look at the places
in the Middle East in which the
United States and Iran are in
potential zones of conflict,
whether that's Syria, the
Israeli-Palestinian issue.
So, there's lots of traps here.
UDY WOODRUFF: Yes, very
complex.
inally, Karim, a number of --
there has been reporting about a
number of Iranian-Americans
imprisoned in Iran.
It's an additional irritant in
the relationship.
Does that play a role in all
this, or is that just side
activity as far as the Iranians
are concerned?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: Well, I don't
think it's affected the Obama
administration's position toward
Iran, but, certainly, it sours
the mood in the United States,
when, after this nuclear deal,
Iran goes and imprisons innocent
Iranian-Americans, including my
friend Siamak Namazi.
think it sends a signal to
diaspora Iranians around the
world that, don't think that
Iran is welcome and open to
business to all of you.
This remains a close state ruled
by the Revolutionary Guards and
the supreme leader.
UDY WOODRUFF: And that is my
final question.
Should Americans understand that
the hard-liners are in charge in
Iran or those who seek to be
bridge-builders?
ARIM SADJADPOUR: I think a
wonderful quote that captures
today's Middle East is from the
poem, a poem from Yeats, who
said, the best lack all
conviction and the worst are
full of passionate intensity.
nd I think, unfortunately,
within Iran, the hard-liners are
very much a minority, but they
continue to have a bulk of
political and coercive power.
UDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's, as
you said, complicated and one
that Americans are keeping a
close watch on.
arim Sadjadpour, we thank you.
ARIM SADJADPOUR: Thank you,
Judy.